Miradi Coding Guidelines
2008-11-04 kbs

A. INDENTING, WHITESPACE, COMPILER SETTINGS, ETC.

Generally, follow Sun's standard Java conventions. 

One notable exception is that left curly braces should go on 
the line below, outdented to match the line above. The effect 
is that open and close braces are in the same column, making 
them easy to visually match. Also, it provides a little extra 
vertical whitespace, which is not a bad idea.

Another deviation is that within a class, all variables and 
constants should go at the bottom of the class, not the top. 
Since most variables are private, they are less interesting 
to someone browsing the class, so it makes sense to hide them 
at the end.

Generally, constructors (and static factory methods) should 
come first, then other public members, then private members. 
However, this is not strictly followed.

The code must be warning-free at all times. As many compiler 
warnings as possible should be enabled. 

B. COMMENTS

Most comments are a hint that the code should be improved. 
There are a few exceptions, where comments are encouraged, 
including:

  - Workarounds for compiler or third-party library bugs
  - Necessary speed optimizations that impair clarity
  - TODO or FIXME comments indicating code that cannot be 
    improved right now, generally due to release deadlines

Class-level comments are neither encouraged nor discouraged.

C. NAMING (CLASSES, METHODS, VARIABLES, PACKAGES)

Naming is extremely important. Whenever possible, choose standard 
or conventional names. Match Java's built-in naming when possible, 
such as XxxTableModel. Follow app-specific conventions, such as 
reference variables ending with Ref. 

Class names should be MixedCase. Variable names should be 
camelCase. Constants should be ALL_CAPS.

Don't be afraid of long names. A long method name that is clear 
is much better than a short one that is ambiguous. For simple 
loops, i is acceptable, but discouraged. Method arguments and 
class members should almost always have clearer names.

Generally, mehods should be named with a verb, and variables 
should be named with a noun. Booleans should start with is, 
has or similar. 

D. MODULARITY AND TESTABILITY, CODE DUPLICATION

The goal is to have as much code as possible be covered by 
automated tests (using junit). To achieve this, the UI layer 
should be as thin as possible (as it is difficult to test).

Generally, in order to be easily testable, code must be 
pretty modular. Even code that does not have automated tests 
should be modular, because modular code tends to be easier 
to understand, maintain, and enhance. 

All automated tests must pass at all times.

Code duplication must be avoided whenever possible. Any 
duplicated logic, no matter how small, is an opportunity for 
a future coder to change one occurance but not the other, 
generating a bug. 

The only acceptable cases where duplication is allowed are:

  - When the Java langage requires it
  - When eliminating it would make the code extremely ugly
  - In cases where required for necessary optimizations

E. LOGIC, SPEED OPTIMIZATION

When possible, choose the simplest algorithm. The most direct 
approach (even "brute force") should be used unless there is 
a compelling reason to do something fancy. Don't optimize code 
for speed until it can be demonstrated that the simplest 
implementation is too slow.

On the other hand, data should be optimized for both simplicity 
and speed. It is easy to change code, but difficult to change 
data, so each new data structure should be considered from 
a speed standpoint before being locked in.

